Pgpool-II support (#607)
CleverCloud/doc.clever-cloud.com: deploy/addon/postgresql/pgpool.md

---
title: Pgpool-II for PostgresSQL add-ons
position: 3

> shortdesc: How to configure and use Pgpool-II for PostgresSQL add-ons

Reviewer: ```suggestion
shortdesc: How to configure and use Pgpool-II for PostgreSQL add-ons
```

tags:
- addons
keywords:
- balancing
- connection
- limit
- load
- pgpool
- pool
- postgres
- proxy
- sql
---

> Pgpool-II is a tool available on application instances to help you manage your connection pool and load balancing of your PostgreSQL add-ons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pgpool-II is a tool available on application instances to help manage your connection pool and load balancing of your PostgreSQL add-ons.
```

?

{{< alert "warning" "Warning:" >}}
Pgpool-II is not available on Docker instances. If you want to use Pgpool-II, you can add it and configure it in your Dockerfile.
{{< /alert >}}

## What is Pgpool-II?

{{< readfile "/content/partials/pgpool.md" >}}

## Why use Pgpool-II?

> **Connection pooling**: Pgpool-II maintains established connections to the PostgreSQL servers, and reuses them whenever a new connection with the same properties (i.e. user name, database, protocol version, and other connection parameters if any) comes in. It reduces the connection overhead, and improves the system's overall throughput.

Reviewer: I'm not sure how this renders in HTML, maybe it should be better to use regular `###` titles like we usually do.

> **Load balancing**: If a database is replicated (because running in either replication mode or native replication mode), performing a SELECT query on any server will return the same result. Pgpool-II takes advantage of the replication feature in order to reduce the load on each PostgreSQL server. It does that by distributing SELECT queries among available servers, improving the system's overall throughput. In an ideal scenario, read performance could improve proportionally to the number of PostgreSQL servers. Load balancing works best in a scenario where a lot of users execute many read-only queries at the same time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Load balancing**: If a database is replicated (because running in either replication mode or native replication mode), performing a `SELECT` query on any server will return the same result. Pgpool-II takes advantage of the replication feature in order to reduce the load on each PostgreSQL server. It does that by distributing `SELECT` queries among available servers, improving the system's overall throughput. In an ideal scenario, read performance could improve proportionally to the number of PostgreSQL servers. Load balancing works best in a scenario where a lot of users execute many read-only queries at the same time.
```

**Limiting Exceeding Connections**: There is a limit on the maximum number of concurrent connections with PostgreSQL, and new connections are rejected when this number is reached. Raising this maximum number of connections, however, increases resource consumption and has a negative impact on overall system performance. Pgpool-II also has a limit on the maximum number of connections, but extra connections will be queued instead of returning an error immediately. However, you can configure to return an error when the connection limit is exceeded (4.1 or later).  

**In Memory Query Cache**: In memory query cache allows to save a pair of SELECT statement and its result. If an identical SELECTs comes in, Pgpool-II returns the value from cache. Since no SQL parsing nor access to PostgreSQL are involved, using in memory cache is extremely fast. On the other hand, it might be slower than the normal path in some cases, because it adds some overhead of storing cache data. 

> The different features are available in the [official Pgpool documentation](https://www.pgpool.net/docs/latest/en/html/index.html).

Reviewer: maybe `various` would be better instead of `different`?

`CC_PGPOOL_HEALTH_CHECK_TIMEOUT`: Specifies the timeout in seconds to give up connecting to the backend PostgreSQL if the TCP connect does not succeed within this time.  
`CC_PGPOOL_HEALTH_CHECK_MAX_RETRIES`: Specifies the maximum number of retries to do before giving up and initiating failover when health check fails.  
`CC_PGPOOL_HEALTH_CHECK_RETRY_DELAY`: Specifies the amount of time in seconds to sleep between failed health check retries.  
`CC_PGPOOL_CONNECT_TIMEOUT`: Specifies the amount of time in milliseconds before giving up connecting to backend using connect() system call.

You can consult the [official Pgpool-II documentation](https://www.pgpool.net/docs/latest/en/html/runtime-config-health-check.html) to get more information about the **health check**.

### In memory cache

In memory cache saves the pair of **SELECT** statement and its result. If the same **SELECTs** comes in, Pgpool-II returns the value from cache. This feature can be activated with the `CC_PGPOOL_MEMORY_CACHE_ENABLED=on` variable.

Many other in memory cache options are configurable with environment variables, such as:

> `CC_PGPOOL_MEMQCACHE_TOTAL_SIZE`: Specifies the shared memory cache size in bytes.  

Reviewer: I think you should prefix all of those items with `-` to make a list. I'm otherwise afraid that it will render on one line

#### Example

Let's say that I'm hosting a simple PHP application on `1 XS` instance, with a scalability that can go up to `4 M` instances. And I'm using the PostgreSQL `S Small Space` plan
which has a connection limit of `125`.

Now my application receives a lot of traffic and scales up to `4 M` instances. But at the same time, I also need to deploy a hot fix. This means that `4 new M` instances will be started, alongside the already existing `4 M` instances. I need to make sure that `MaxCon` doesn't go above `125`.

Here is the summary:
- 8 instances: 4 currently running, 4 currently deploying my hot fix
- 125 max connections: the maximum number of connections of my PostgreSQL add-on's plan
- 5 other connections: I want to be able to use PG Studio or any CLI tool at the same time, in case I need it

`CC_PGPOOL_NUM_INIT_CHILDREN = ( (125 - 5) / 8 ) = 15`. If I set `CC_PGPOOL_NUM_INIT_CHILDREN` to `15`, each instance should have enough connections to query the database without errors. And it also leaves me some spare connections (`5`) available if anything goes wrong and I need to connect to my database using a CLI tool or PG Studio.

## Tips / debug

> #### How can I access Pgpool-II from my application?

Reviewer: Maybe a 3rd level title would be enough? `###` (same here and below)

> Connect via [ssh](https://www.clever-cloud.com/doc/administrate/ssh-clever-tools/) to your application and use the [psql](https://docs.postgresql.fr/10/app-psql.html) command.

Reviewer: Add a line break after the title (same here and below)

```

#### How can I see the Pgpool-II processes waiting for connections and processing a connection?
You can use the [`SHOW POOL_PROCESSES;`](https://www.pgpool.net/docs/latest/en/html/sql-show-pool-processes.html) command.
```sql
bjzfhkl5qc**********=> SHOW POOL_PROCESSES;
 pool_pid |     start_time      |       database       |       username       |     create_time     | pool_counter
----------+---------------------+----------------------+----------------------+---------------------+--------------
 21554    | 2021-06-03 11:28:36 | bjzfhkl5qc********** | u5dh6v2ymn********** | 2021-06-03 11:28:48 | 1
 11409    | 2021-06-02 19:54:53 |                      |                      |                     |
 11410    | 2021-06-02 19:54:53 |                      |                      |                     |
 21566    | 2021-06-03 11:29:20 |                      |                      |                     |
```

#### How can I see the list of pools managed by Pgpool-II?
You can use the [`SHOW POOL_POOLS;`](https://www.pgpool.net/docs/latest/en/html/sql-show-pool-pools.html) command.
```sql

> bjzfhkl5qckns3f2zfse=> SHOW POOL_POOLS;

Reviewer: You did not hide the name here. I wouldn't have bothered doing it in the first place, it doesn't hurt to let it. But consistency :p

**Automated fail over**: If one of the database servers goes down or becomes unreachable, Pgpool-II will detach it and will continue operations by using the rest of database servers. There are some sophisticated features that help the automated failover including timeouts and retries. 

**Replication**: Pgpool-II can manage multiple PostgreSQL servers. Activating the replication feature makes it possible to create a real time backup on 2 or more PostgreSQL clusters, so that the service can continue without interruption if one of those clusters fails. Pgpool-II has built-in replication (native replication). However user can use external replication features including streaming replication of PostgreSQL. 

> **Limiting Exceeding Connections**: There is a limit on the maximum number of concurrent connections with PostgreSQL, and new connections are rejected when this number is reached. Raising this maximum number of connections, however, increases resource consumption and has a negative impact on overall system performance. Pgpool-II also has a limit on the maximum number of connections, but extra connections will be queued instead of returning an error immediately. However, you can configure to return an error when the connection limit is exceeded (4.1 or later).  

Reviewer 2: To sum up my ideas:

```suggestion
**Limiting Exceeding Connections**: PostgreSQL puts a limit on the amount of concurrent connections, so that new connections are rejected when this number is reached. Raising this maximum number of connections, however, increases resource consumption and has a negative impact on overall system performance. Pgpool-II also limits the number of concurrent connections, but extra connections will be queued instead of returning an error immediately. Or you can configure it to return an error when the connection limit is exceeded (4.1 or later).  
```

> **In Memory Query Cache**: In memory query cache allows to save a pair of SELECT statement and its result. If an identical SELECTs comes in, Pgpool-II returns the value from cache. Since no SQL parsing nor access to PostgreSQL are involved, using in memory cache is extremely fast. On the other hand, it might be slower than the normal path in some cases, because it adds some overhead of storing cache data. 

Reviewer: Also (and backtick SELECT :pray:):
- `SELECT statements`
- `their results`
- `identical SELECT`

The different features are available in the [official Pgpool documentation](https://www.pgpool.net/docs/latest/en/html/index.html).

{{< alert "info" "Information:" >}}
We only support the **Streaming** mode, which is the most used and recommended mode for Pgpool-II. If you need other modes or features that are not supported on Clever Cloud, please contact us at <support@clever-cloud.com> 
{{< /alert >}}

## How to configure Pgpool-II

### Enable Pgpool-II for your application

> The first thing to do to configure Pgpool-II is to link your PostgreSQL add-on. To do that, you can go to the `Service Dependencies` page of your application

Reviewer: You should also have a line break here I think, between the title and this text

If you ever need to stop using Pgpool-II, you can remove this variable or set it to `false`.

Your application will use a Unix Domain Socket to connect to Pgpool-II. Unix domain sockets are faster than TCP sockets because there is no handshake and the connection is made locally on the same machine. A special environment variable will be injected to your environment variables: `CC_PGPOOL_SOCKET_PATH`. This variable contains the path to the Unix Domain Socket you have to connect. See [Usages](#usages) below for some example on how to use it.

The available Pgpool-II variables and their descriptions are available on our [environment variables reference page](https://www.clever-cloud.com/doc/reference/reference-environment-variables/).  

### Concurrent session and pool size  

You can use the `CC_PGPOOL_NUM_INIT_CHILDREN` and `CC_PGPOOL_MAX_POOL` environment variables to set the number of **concurrent sessions** and the number of **connection pool caches per connection**.

Let's take an example with 3 PostgreSQL servers, you have configured the `CC_PGPOOL_NUM_INIT_CHILDREN` variable with a value of **32**. 

> At startup, Pgpool-II will start **32** processes, one process per connection. The `CC_PGPOOL_MAX_POOL` variable is used to configure the number of cached connections per connection (process). This option is mostly used when you have different credentials for the same PostgreSQL server (database, user...). But in the case of **Streaming** mode on Clever Cloud, you have access to only one database, and the credentials are the same on all add-ons with binary replication. You should not need to change the default value of this variable (**1** by default).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On startup, Pgpool-II will start **32** processes, one process per connection. The `CC_PGPOOL_MAX_POOL` variable is used to configure the number of cached connections per connection (process). This option is mostly used when you have different credentials for the same PostgreSQL server (database, user...). But in the case of **Streaming** mode on Clever Cloud, you have access to only one database, and the credentials are the same on all add-ons with binary replication. You should not need to change the default value of this variable (**1** by default).
```

Reviewer 2: I have wondered and researched about that one. *On startup* feels more natural to me but it turns out both formulations are [almost interchangeable](https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/154467/at-startup-vs-on-startup).

 3527     | 2021-06-02 15:22:12 | 0       | 1          |                      |                      |                     | 0            | 0            | 0            | 0               | 0
 3527     | 2021-06-02 15:22:12 | 0       | 2          |                      |                      |                     | 0            | 0            | 0            | 0               | 0
 3528     | 2021-06-02 15:22:12 | 0       | 0          |                      |                      |                     | 0            | 0            | 0            | 0               | 0
 3528     | 2021-06-02 15:22:12 | 0       | 1          |                      |                      |                     | 0            | 0            | 0            | 0               | 0
 3528     | 2021-06-02 15:22:12 | 0       | 2          |                      |                      |                     | 0            | 0            | 0            | 0               | 0
 ...      | ...                 | .       | .          |                      |                      |                     | .            | .            | .            | .               | .
```

> We can see the 32 available processes (**3526**, **3527**, **3528...**), and active connections for process **3526**, with an open connection for each postgresql server (**1520665**, **1665071** and **531483**).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We can see the 32 available processes (**3526**, **3527**, **3528...**), and active connections for process **3526**, with an open connection for each PostgreSQL server (**1520665**, **1665071** and **531483**).
```

> If a process remains inactive for more than **300** seconds, it will be deleted and a new process will take its place. This value can be configured with the `CC_PGPOOL_CHILD_LIFE_TIME` variable. This is a measure to prevent the memory leaks and other unexpected errors in Pgpool-II children.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a process remains inactive for more than **300** seconds, it will be deleted and a new process will take its place. This value can be configured with the `CC_PGPOOL_CHILD_LIFE_TIME` variable. This is a measure to prevent memory leaks and other unexpected errors in Pgpool-II children.
```

Once replication is in place, you can use the `CC_PGPOOL_FOLLOWERS` environment variable to add the follower(s) to your Pgpool-II configuration. This variable is in **JSON** format, and must contain the **host**, **port** and **weight** of each follower.

An example of the ``CC_PGPOOL_FOLLOWERS`` variable with two followers: 
```json
[
  {
    "hostname": "<DATABASE>-postgresql.services.clever-cloud.com",
    "port": "<PORT>",
    "weight": "1"
  },
  {
    "hostname": "<DATABASE>-postgresql.services.clever-cloud.com",
    "port": "<PORT>",
    "weight": "1"
  }
]
```

The weight is used to specify the load balance ratio of the backends, you can also configure the weight of the leader with the `CC_PGPOOL_LEADER_WEIGHT` variable.

{{< alert "info" "Information:" >}}
You can set a higher value for followers to avoid overloading the leader with **SELECT** queries that could be made on followers.
{{< /alert >}}

> Many other **load balancing** options are configurable with environment variables. You can refer to our [environment variables reference page](https://www.clever-cloud.com/doc/reference/reference-environment-variables/) and the [official Pgpool-II documentation](https://www.pgpool.net/docs/latest/en/html/runtime-config-load-balancing.html) for more informations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Many other **load balancing** options are configurable with environment variables. You can refer to our [environment variables reference page](https://www.clever-cloud.com/doc/reference/reference-environment-variables/) and the [official Pgpool-II documentation](https://www.pgpool.net/docs/latest/en/html/runtime-config-load-balancing.html) for more information.
```

### Health check

Pgpool-II periodically connects to the configured PostgreSQL backends to detect any error on the servers or networks. If an error is detected, Pgpool-II performs failover or degeneration depending on the configurations. 

The health check is not activated by default, but you can activate it with the `CC_PGPOOL_HEALTH_CHECK_PERIOD` variable.

Many other health check options are configurable with environment variables, such as:

`CC_PGPOOL_HEALTH_CHECK_TIMEOUT`: Specifies the timeout in seconds to give up connecting to the backend PostgreSQL if the TCP connect does not succeed within this time.  
`CC_PGPOOL_HEALTH_CHECK_MAX_RETRIES`: Specifies the maximum number of retries to do before giving up and initiating failover when health check fails.  

> `CC_PGPOOL_HEALTH_CHECK_RETRY_DELAY`: Specifies the amount of time in seconds to sleep between failed health check retries.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`CC_PGPOOL_HEALTH_CHECK_RETRY_DELAY`: Specifies the amount of time (in seconds) to sleep before retrying after a failed health check.  
```

> `CC_PGPOOL_CONNECT_TIMEOUT`: Specifies the amount of time in milliseconds before giving up connecting to backend using connect() system call.

Reviewer: backticks around `connect()`

You can consult the [official Pgpool-II documentation](https://www.pgpool.net/docs/latest/en/html/runtime-config-health-check.html) to get more information about the **health check**.

### In memory cache

> In memory cache saves the pair of **SELECT** statement and its result. If the same **SELECTs** comes in, Pgpool-II returns the value from cache. This feature can be activated with the `CC_PGPOOL_MEMORY_CACHE_ENABLED=on` variable.

Reviewer: same, `SELECT` + backticks

Many other in memory cache options are configurable with environment variables, such as:

`CC_PGPOOL_MEMQCACHE_TOTAL_SIZE`: Specifies the shared memory cache size in bytes.  
`CC_PGPOOL_MEMQCACHE_MAX_NUM_CACHE`: Specifies the number of cache entries. This is used to define the size of cache management space.   
`CC_PGPOOL_MEMQCACHE_CACHE_BLOCK_SIZE`: Specifies the cache block size.  
`CC_PGPOOL_MEMQCACHE_EXPIRE`: Specifies the life time of query cache in seconds.  
`CC_PGPOOL_MEMQCACHE_AUTO_CACHE_INVALIDATION`: Automatically deletes the cache related to the updated tables.
`CC_PGPOOL_MEMQCACHE_MAXCACHE`: Specifies the maximum size in bytes of the SELECT query result to be cached.

> `CC_PGPOOL_CACHE_SAFE_MEMQCACHE_TABLE_LIST`: Specifies a comma separated list of table names whose SELECT results should be cached by Pgpool-II.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`CC_PGPOOL_CACHE_SAFE_MEMQCACHE_TABLE_LIST`: Specifies a comma-separated list of table names whose SELECT results should be cached by Pgpool-II.
```

> `CC_PGPOOL_CACHE_UNSAFE_MEMQCACHE_TABLE_LIST`: Specifies a comma separated list of table names whose SELECT results should NOT be cached by the Pgpool-II.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`CC_PGPOOL_CACHE_UNSAFE_MEMQCACHE_TABLE_LIST`: Specifies a comma-separated list of table names whose SELECT results should NOT be cached by Pgpool-II.
```

You can consult the [official Pgpool-II documentation](https://www.pgpool.net/docs/latest/en/html/runtime-in-memory-query-cache.html#GUC-MEMQCACHE-AUTO-CACHE-INVALIDATION) to get more information about the **in memory cache**.

### Scalability

> When the scalability of your application is enabled, you may need to tweak the `CC_PGPOOL_NUM_INIT_CHILDREN` value. This is what we are going to see.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When the scalability of your application is enabled, you may need to tweak the `CC_PGPOOL_NUM_INIT_CHILDREN` value. This is what we are going to see here.
```

Auto scalability will add or remove instances following your needs. This means that you may have multiple instances running at the same time for a certain period of time.
If your application restarts, you will have `your current instance number * 2`  instances running in parallel while the deployment finishes and the old instances are stopped.
A new deployment **starts** new instances with the old ones alongside them.

> This means that you can have up to `maximum scalability * 2` instances running at the same time. And if all of your instances open the maximum connections they are allowed to,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This means that up to `maximum scalability * 2` instances can run at the same time. And if all instances open the maximum connections they are allowed to,
```

> This means that you can have up to `maximum scalability * 2` instances running at the same time. And if all of your instances open the maximum connections they are allowed to,

Reviewer: If all this text was copied from MySQL ProxySQL, would you mind applying the same fixes to that page as well please? :p In another PR would be great but if you don't have the time, open an issue :)

Max Retry Count               : 0
Max Health Check Duration     : 0
Minimum Health Check Duration : 0
Average Health Check Duration : 0.000000
Last Health Check             :
Last Successful Health Check  :
Last Skip Health Check        :
Last Failed Health Check      :
```

You can find all the PCP commands in the [official Pgpool-II documentation](https://www.pgpool.net/docs/latest/en/html/pcp-commands.html).

## Usage

### PHP using PDO

Using [PDO](https://www.php.net/manual/fr/ref.pdo-pgsql.connection.php), you have to use the `unix_socket` option in your DSN:

```php
<?php
// This variable is injected during the deployment
$host = getenv("CC_PGPOOL_SOCKET_PATH");
// Get the database name from the environment
$database = getenv("POSTGRESQL_ADDON_DB");
// Get the database user from the environment
$user = getenv("POSTGRESQL_ADDON_USER");
// Get the database password from the environment
$password = getenv("POSTGRESQL_ADDON_PASSWORD");

$dsn = "pgsql:host=$host;dbname=$database;user=$user;password=$password";

try{
    $conn = new PDO($dsn);
	if($conn){
		echo "Successfully connected to $dbname!";
	}
}catch (PDOException $e){
	echo $e->getMessage();
}
?>

> ```

Reviewer 3: ```
try {
    $conn = new PDO($dsn);
    if($conn) {
        echo "Successfully connected to $dbname!";
    }
} catch (PDOException $e){
    echo $e->getMessage();
}
```

> ### PHP using PDO

Reviewer 3: That title is wrong, I guess you wanted to write "WordPress"?

> For Wordpress, you can change the `DB_HOST` variable in your `wp-config.php`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For WordPress, you can change the `DB_HOST` variable in your `wp-config.php`:
```
